{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf330
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset77 Geneva;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f2\fnil\fcharset77 Monaco;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green191\blue0;\red0\green0\blue191;\red0\green115\blue0;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf2 Programming Exercises\cf0 \
\
The exercises in this file are intended to test your SC programming after this week's classes. We will discuss solutions in the seminar next week. \
\
\
a) Make a function with argument N which returns an array of N random numbers between 1.0 and 10.0. The numbers must have been sorted into decreasing order (hint: try [1,4,3].sort) \
\
\
b) Imagine you have to generate a rhythm for one 4/4 bar (i.e. 4 beats). Write a short program which selects random successive numbers from [1.0, 0.5, 0.25] to fill up one bar's worth of beats. How do you deal with going past the end of the bar? (hint: what does .choose do on an array?) \
\
\
c) Rewrite the following code as a series of nested ifs\
\
i.e. if(condition1, \{\}, \{if (condition2, etc.)\})\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f1\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f2\b0\fs18 \cf0 (\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural
\cf3 var\cf0  z;\
z = 4.rand;\
switch (z,\
	0, \{ \cf4 \\outcome1\cf0  \},\
	1, \{ \cf4 \\outcome2\cf0  \},\
	2, \{ \cf4 \\outcome3\cf0  \},\
	3, \{ \cf4 \\outcome4\cf0  \}\
).postln;\
)\
\

\fs20 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 Now also rewrite it as a choice amongst elements of an array. \
\
\
d) Compare each of these lines by running them one at a time:\
\
2.rand\
\
2.0.rand\
\
2.rand2\
\
2.0.rand2\
\
rrand(2,4)\
\
rrand(2.0,4.0)\
\
exprand(1.0,10.0)\
\
\
Write a program which plots ten outputs from any one of these lines in a row. Advanced: actually allow user selection (via a variable for instance) of which line gets used to generate the ten random numbers. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}