{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf410
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset77 Monaco;\f1\fnil\fcharset77 Geneva;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green115\blue0;\red0\green0\blue191;\red191\green0\blue0;
\red191\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf2 Buses\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f1 \cf3 Server\cf0 .default=s=\cf3 Server\cf0 .local;\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0 \cf0 \
\
When instantiating Synths we've begun to worry about audio buses, because we're now starting to use the Out UGen (and there is also an In UGen). \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \
\
First a note about Audio inputs and outputs. The scsynth server application has 128 buses by default- these can be thought of as mixer channels or tracks within which independent audio can be running. One quirk is that the inputs and outputs for your soundcard always reserve the first  contiguous run of these.\
\
You set how many ins and outs your machine has in the ServerOptions class, and that depends on the capabilities of your soundcard. 
\f1 The critical lines are:\
\
\cf4 //default \cf0 \
\cf3 Server\cf0 .local.options.numOutputBusChannels = 8;\
\cf3 Server\cf0 .local.options.numInputBusChannels = 8;
\f0 \
\cf4 //you might change this to 2 in 2 out for a straight stereo setup\cf0 \
\
(this code has to be run before you boot the server in question- it won't change anything in a current running server, just the next time you start up) \
\
8 in, 8 out is the default btw, and probably best if you stick with that. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Assuming we have 8 out, 8 in, I know that of the 128 buses, indices\
\
0-7 are the 8 outs\
8-15 are the 8 ins\
16-127 are for whatever rendering purposes I desire. \
\
These numbers are precisely those you see when you use the Out and In unit generators in SynthDefs. \
\
\cf4 //mono sound, just plays in left ear because that's the first audio out on my soundcard\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(0,\cf3 SinOsc\cf0 .ar(440,0,0.1))\}.play\
\
\cf4 //mono sound, in right ear\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(1,\cf3 SinOsc\cf0 .ar(440,0,0.1))\}.play\
\
\cf4 //can't hear it, though its playing, because my machine only has stereo out capability\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(2,\cf3 SinOsc\cf0 .ar(440,0,0.1))\}.play\
\cf5 //you'll see it if you use the scope (remember to boot and ->default the internal server on the Mac, or just use .jscope with SwingOSC)\cf6 \
\cf0 \
\
\cf4 //get the first audio input, route to the left ear\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(0,\cf3 In.ar(8,1)\cf0 )\}.play\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
A critical point is that if you have an n-channel sound, which you put onto bus x, it will overlap onto buses x to x+n-1. \
\
\cf4 //stereo sound put onto bus 0 plays first channel on 0, second on 1: so stereo out\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(0,\cf3 SinOsc\cf0 .ar([440,880],0,0.1))\}.play\
\
\cf4 //This would work if I had 8 ins and 8 outs...\
//I get all 8 inputs and route to all 8 outputs. \cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(0,\cf3 In\cf0 .ar(8,8))\}.play\
\
\cf4 //Similar, will output this 16 channel sound to buses 16-31 (you won't hear anything)\cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(16,\cf3 SinOsc\cf0 .ar(\cf3 Array\cf0 .series(16,400,100),0,0.1))\}.play\
\
\cf4 //this gets them back to hearing, mixing to central field \cf0 \
\{\cf3 Out\cf0 .ar(0,\cf3 Pan2\cf0 .ar(\cf3 Mix\cf0 .ar(\cf3 InFeedback\cf0 .ar(16,16)),0.0))\}.play\
\cf4 //The InFeedback will be explained later in the course; it's necessary to avoid execution order problems we will only cover later on\cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
}